---
layout: post
title: "Will GDPR affect advancements in Artificial Intelligence?"
author: george_trick
date: 2018-04-03T16:34:45+01:00
categories: ["Accountability", "artificial intelligence", "Big data", "Consent", "Consentric", "Consentric Permissions", "Data Protection", "GDPR", "machine learning", "Opinions", "Permissions", "Privacy"]
slug: will-gdpr-affect-advancements-in-artificial-intelligence
draft: false
meta_title: "Will GDPR affect advancements in Artificial Intelligence?"
---

The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) comes into force on 25th May 2018. However, if you are a regular reader of our blogs, you will know that by now. As an organisation, you should be preparing to deliver trust and transparency with your customers, if you are a data subject (citizen) you should be preparing to take back control of your personal data. One of the greatest achievements in the modern digital age is the innovations of Artificial Intelligence (AI). AI is the theory and development of computer systems able to perform tasks normally requiring human intelligence, such as visual perception, speech recognition, decision-making, and translation between languages. The potential of AI is something of great excitement to futurists, and transhumanist believers, who predict that AI could be billions of times smarter than humans, with the possibility of individuals needing to merge with computers to survive. Current technology that is integrated with AI could include device wearables, such as, an Apple Watch which can monitor your physical activity and certain health attributes. These devices obviously have a private benefit to the individual consuming it. These devices create a wide array of data sets, which contribute to creating the internet of things. Organisations can benefit from access to this data, to continue innovating technologies and solutions through AI or by using the data to produce sophisticated insights for both the consumer and organisation. When put to good use, the potential these technologies produce for society is exponential. However, when organisations take advantage and negatively exploit the wide array of personal data created by such technologies, we could see the current global crisis in trust deepen. Recently, at an event I attended about the potential of AI applications to be further integrated within the NHS, several AI developers aired concerns that GDPR could stifle innovation within the field. Many “GDPR experts” in the room immediately challenged this view, as I did on behalf of Consentric. The overwhelming view of the room was that firstly, GDPR is a necessary step to take to protect the collection, use and sharing of personal data. Secondly, those who worked within the NHS believed GDPR would actually reduce the number of opt-outs. Their belief was, if citizens had greater control over what their personal data was used for, for example, development of applications to improve their healthcare management, the more likely they were to give permission for this purpose. Furthermore, fully anonymised data is not covered by GDPR. AI developers can continue to freely use anonymised data to develop AI applications. Those creating AI solutions that will have a benefit to the citizen or the wider public could also claim either legitimate or public interest as the legal justification for collecting, using or sharing personal data. As long as every organisation can show they are completely transparent and delivering value from using citizens’ personal data, I believe a stronger trust will be built between organisations and citizens. GDPR will ensure that organisations, either using personal data to develop AI or capturing personal data through applications run by AI algorithms, are not crossing the moral line, exploiting citizens personal data. Therefore,  GDPR should in no way stifle innovation within this sector, as long as development is for ethical reasons and the organisation is being fully transparent about the purposes of using individuals’ personal data.     **How we can help…** **Case Study- Consentric: a platform solution for managing patient consent** Consented data, real-time data capture and machine learning brought together. One place for all Personal Information Management. That’s secure and convenient. That grows with you. That’s Consentric. The Consentric Platform has consent at its heart. It is a trust platform. Consentric opens paths of communication to engage with your patients or customers and strengthen trust. Our mission to rethink personal data and deliver change was developed before the current burst of activity around GDPR. Our expertise in data management, protection, and it’s service capability, reflects the latest thinking and best practice. Using Consentric, patient consent data can be collected, collated and shared to provide informed insights for research, policy, treatment and healthcare planning. Individuals understand the data that’s held, who can see it, share it and for what purpose.   Learn more in our [Product Brochure](https://consentric.io/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/A4-4pp-Consentric-leafletV4-1.pdf) [Click here](https://consentric.io/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/GDPR-and-AI-website-version.docx) to download a copy of this article.     Harry Cromack Policy Analyst – MyLife Digital