---
layout: post
title: "Exonar joins forces with MyLife Digital – for the good of trees"
author: Debs
date: 2018-01-18T11:12:10+00:00
categories: ["Consentric", "Data Protection", "Exonar", "GDPR", "General Data Protection Regulation", "MyLife Digital", "Opinions", "SAR", "Save a tree for privacy", "Subject Access Request"]
slug: exonar-joins-forces-with-mylife-digital-for-the-good-of-trees
draft: false
meta_title: "Exonar joins forces with MyLife Digital – for the good of trees"
---

Newbury based Exonar has joined forces with MyLife Digital to provide an end to end solution to organisations who need to solve their General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) problems, especially when it comes to Subject Access Requests (SARs). GDPR has been around for two years, the enforcement date is set as 25th May 2018 – from this date the Information Commissioners Office (ICO) will be holding UK organisations accountable to the principles of this legislation rather than the Data Protection Act. As information about the GDPR has been available since 2015, there will be no further grace period – basically, we are already in it. So, has your organisation used the last two years to prepare for the changes? Do you know where all the data is? Who has access to it? When was it collected and which Privacy Policy was in place at that point in time?  How do you retrieve all the information required if a customer requests to see it? – Possibly not, but you are not alone. [Exonar’s GDPR](https://www.exonar.com/gdpr-solutions/) Dashboard supplements the Consentric Permissions offering as a connected software service for end-to-end management of personal data and compliance. When the two technologies are used together your organisation is much better placed to be proactive when it comes to many GDPR requirements. The GDPR Dashboard can help with data mapping, SARs, data portability and the right to be forgotten. It shows an overall picture of all the data held by an organisation, which is subject to GDPR, where it is held and its characteristics. In response to research carried out by Exonar, which found that 57% of Britons will submit a SAR - which would result in over 2.2 million trees being felled for paper for printing - a campaign was started. “Plant a Tree for Privacy” requests that for every SAR submitted to an organisation they plant a tree to compensate for the amount of paper required to fulfil the request by donating to the Woodland Trust. #plantatreeforprivacy Adrian Barrett, CEO and Founder of Exonar says “I have been involved in technology implementation and organisational change for over 20 years, and have seen many developments, but GDPR is quite the game changer, as significant as anything since Sarbanes-Oxley. Many organisations don’t really know where to start when it comes to the vast quantity of data they hold on customers, employees, suppliers and prospects. And that’s where we come in. Right at the beginning, or step 2 of the ICO’s 12 steps to be precise, we can help our customers to understand what they need and how we can help deliver a solution. Working with MyLife Digital being able to add Consentric Permissions into the mix presents a great opportunity to systematically solve a number of challenging GDPR problems for our customers.” Consentric Permissions rebalances trust and control of personal data between the organisation and the member. It demonstrates that an organisation complies with data protection legislation by providing digital management for data consent and all the lawful processing justifications defined by the GDPR and the UK Data Protection Bill. Permissions integrates across the organisation with existing CRM’s Campaign Management Tools, ESP’s and other systems. It has both a self-service portal for members and a contact centre portal for staff, using organisation branding to ensure a consistent user experience. Emma Corbett, Business Development Manager for MyLife Digital adds “It’s a very powerful story especially when it comes to the right to be forgotten and SARs. Giving an organisation the ability to find where personal data is stored and reducing the amount of human intervention between the request submissions and conclusion really speeds up the process and provides the customer with a better experience. Added to the ability to manage their own permissions in a company branded self-serve portal or via a contact centre portal, organisations can really align to the principles of the new regulation. They can be accountable, transparent and  empower customers when it comes to the use of their personal data. This will help strengthen trust between both parties, increasing loyalty and protecting the organisations brand reputation.” For more information about [Consentric Permissions](https://consentric.io/solutions/permissions/) For more information about [Exonar’s capabailities ](https://www.exonar.com/gdpr-solutions/)