---
layout: post
title: "MyLife Digital signs partnership with Bench for GDPR permissions management"
author: Debs
date: 2017-09-26T08:55:19+01:00
categories: ["Bench", "Consentric Permissions", "Daniel Telling", "GDPR", "John Hall", "mybench", "MyLife Digital", "Opinions", "partnership", "St Ives"]
slug: mylife-digital-signs-partnership-with-bench-for-gdpr-permissions-management
draft: false
meta_title: "MyLife Digital signs partnership with Bench for GDPR permissions management"
---

MyLife Digital (MLD) will harness the power of Bench’s data analytics and technology consulting to help organisations deliver their consumers’ new data rights under the new regulation which comes into force in May 2018. Under a partnership agreement signed today, Bench will distribute and integrate MLD’s Consentric Permissions service into their client base. Consentric Permissions is a cloud-based offering which allows organisations to manage the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) data consents, permissions and processing justifications for, and on behalf of, their customers or members. Bench is part of the international marketing services group, St Ives, and under this partnership agreement will be able to distribute the Consentric Permissions service into the other St Ives divisions’ client-bases. Consentric Permissions has been designed from the ground up to directly enable the new GDPR subject rights which come into force on 25th May 2018 to be supported by client organisations. Enshrining the relevant GDPR articles, the Permissions service acts as the single source of truth for consents and permissions across all of an organisations systems and processes through the use of an open API, augmented by interfaces for human interaction. GDPR promotes the new principle of accountability for organisations (GDPR, Article 5) by requiring transparency around consumers’ data and what it can be used for. Consentric Permissions facilitates this by controlling and displaying explicit permissions settings for individual consumers. The deep expertise of the Bench consulting teams will enable client organisations to properly position GDPR permissions management within a data governance strategy, to operationalise GDPR readiness and to accelerate the activation of the Consentric Permissions service. Although the GDPR compliance deadline is an important focus for the partnership, the principles of giving control back to consumers and building trust in organisations by helping them be more transparent and accountable are fundamental. Daniel Telling, Managing Partner at Bench says**:** “In an age where data underpins everything we do, our partnership with MyLife Digital heralds a real opportunity for all organisations, especially smaller and mid-sized enterprises, to get their data in order. The catalyst for this may well be GDPR compliance, but there has always been a strong business case for better information management, solid information governance and sensible information lifecycle management. “GDPR is all about giving control back to consumers and making companies more responsible for their data management, with company directors becoming personally liable for data management processes. It also offers a real opportunity for organisations to review current practices, get their data management and governance in order and make more use of data to improve the customer experience. It also presents a good chance for businesses to re-engage with customers and educate them on the benefits of data sharing. “The organisations that lead the response to this challenge will be seen as innovators and brands with a social conscience who are protecting their customers. We look forward to working with MyLife Digital and its Consentric platform to help our clients achieve this end.” MyLife Digital Group CEO, John Hall, says “The combination of MyLife Digital’s Consentric Permissions platform, and Bench’s expertise and innovation in data management and governance is a powerful one which will accelerate progress towards GDPR compliance for client organisations. Combined with Bench’s business intelligence capabilities, it is also helping create a new area of insights and advanced analytics associated with consumer data sets”.