---
layout: post
title: "MyLife Digital and TermSet announce partnership"
author: Debs
date: 2017-10-05T12:26:00+01:00
categories: ["artificial intelligence", "GDPR", "GMA Consulting", "MyLife Digital", "Opinions", "Partnerships", "Personal Data", "Termset"]
slug: mylife-digital-and-termset-announce-partnership
draft: false
meta_title: "MyLife Digital and TermSet announce partnership"
---

MyLife Digital (MLD) and TermSet have combined the power of artificial intelligence and best-practice GDPR consent and permissions management technology to assist organisations in achieving the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) compliance more quickly, cheaply and accurately. The TermSet ScanR product automatically scans, identifies and retrieves all personal information in all documents stored within multiple systems such as Office365, SharePoint, Google Drive, Dropbox, One Drive, and CRM systems. MyLife Digital’s Consentric Permissions service uses the TermSet service output as a guide and navigational aid to capture, store and manage all GDPR-related consents and permissions associated with personal data across the organisation and its systems.

[TermSet](https://termset.com/) is an end-to-end metadata creation and tagging solution. It uses powerful natural language processing to create taxonomies from the information inside an organisation’s files and documents, and manages the real-time tagging of personal data relevant to GDPR. An on-premise service which can be trained to recognise new personal information and consent patterns, ScanR can recognise hundreds of different types of personal and sensitive data and associated consents, creating information taxonomies that are unique to each organisation and its particular customer base. Manually building taxonomies from scratch is a time-consuming, trial and error-prone process. TermSet’s capability automates this task and reduces maintenance overhead for ongoing GDPR operational management. Consentric Permissions has been designed from the ground up to directly enable the new GDPR subject rights which come into force on 25th May 2018 to be supported by client organisations. Enshrining the relevant GDPR articles, the Permissions service acts as the single source of truth for consents and permissions across all of an organisations systems and processes through the use of an open API, augmented by interfaces for human consumption. GDPR promotes the new principle of accountability for organisations (GDPR, Article 5) by requiring transparency around consumers’ data and what it can be used for. The Consentric Permissions service facilitates this by controlling and displaying explicit permissions settings for individual consumers. The deep expertise of the TermSet team in automating the scanning, identifying and retrieving personal data across an organisation, and their use of artificial intelligence to train and refine their service to achieve the highest levels of accuracy is very valuable in operationalising GDPR. Although the GDPR compliance deadline is an important focus for the partnership, the principles of giving control back to consumers and building trust in organisations by helping them be more transparent and accountable are fundamental. MyLife Digital Group CEO, John Hall, says “The exponential increase in data that has occurred in the last decade, in terms of the volume, variety and velocity of data that organisations must deal with, paired with the upcoming GDPR regulation, presents a huge challenge. Capturing and storing of personal information today is a very delicate process and requires significantly more attention than it did in the past. Most companies have this information located in many pockets across their networks and managing the cumulative compliance burden means using digital workspace tools to ensure that communication policies are in sync with new regulations. We believe TermSet are class-leaders in what they do, and their ability to add value to clients by positioning our Consentric Permissions management service downstream of their toolset will bring substantial benefits to client organisations.” Stewart Connors, CEO at TermSet says: “GDPR is all about giving control back to consumers and making companies more responsible for their data management, with company directors becoming personally liable for data management processes. It also offers a real opportunity for organisations to review current practices, get their data management and governance in order and make more use of data to improve the customer experience. It also presents a good chance for businesses to re-engage with customers and educate them on the benefits of data sharing. The organisations that lead the response to this challenge will be seen as innovators and brands with a social conscience who are protecting their customers. We look forward to working with MyLife Digital and its Consentric Permissions platform to help our clients achieve this end.”