---
layout: post
title: "PwC Scale Programme launches with MyLife Digital on board"
author: Debs
date: 2018-02-15T09:57:09+00:00
categories: ["Bristol", "Consentric", "Engine Shed", "Innovation", "J Cromack", "MyLife Digital", "Opinions", "PwC", "Scale Programme", "Technology"]
slug: pwc-scale-programme-launches-with-mylife-digital-on-board
draft: false
meta_title: "PwC Scale Programme launches with MyLife Digital on board"
---

Twelve companies will line-up on 1st March, to pitch their value proposition at the Scale | South West Executive Evening, including MyLife Digital. Strengthening Bristol’s reputation as a tech, creative and media hub, PwC and Business West, in collaboration with Engine Shed have identified a dozen fast-growth companies in the South West and Wales who will embark on an exciting journey to help tackle the challenges of ‘scaling up’. The Scale | South West programme will link these selected businesses with market leaders, industry experts and investors to help drive further their growth and expansion. Welcoming the selected companies, Katharine Finn, PwC regional leader for the West, said: “This is a fantastic opportunity for industry leaders, experts and investors to engage with the founders of fast-growth companies that have the potential to be future market leaders. “Our aim is for founders and executives to learn from each other and feedback from previous programmes suggests that this process evolves as the programme develops. We are confident that this will continue into the current programme and that will, in turn, lead to real development and scale-up opportunities.” The Scale proposition brings together companies who have developed disruptive and innovative technology, with executive decision makers looking to innovate, establish partnerships or provide mentoring and advice. Over 20 large corporates with strong regional presence are already showing their support to the initiative. [For the full news release click here](https://www.pwc.co.uk/who-we-are/regional-sites/west/press-releases/pwc--business-west-and-engine-shed-announce-scale-south-west-par.html) J Cromack, MyLife Digital CCO, said: “Being exposed to a network of Partners and corporate contacts of PwC was too good an opportunity to miss. The combined knowledge, support and review of our proposition and business plan will certainly help us scale our business. Working alongside and sharing experiences with like-minded individuals feels like it’ll be mutual gain for all while also supporting the aspirations of the South West to become a leading technology region in the UK.”