---
layout: post
title: "MyLife Digital Group CCO recognised as one of the DataIQ 100"
author: Debs
date: 2018-03-01T10:52:04+00:00
categories: ["CCO", "Consentric", "Data 100", "Data and Analytics Industry", "Data Privacy", "Data Protection", "Data100", "DataIQ", "David Reed", "Elizabeth Denham", "GDPR", "ICO", "J Cromack", "MyLife Digital", "Opinions"]
slug: mylife-digital-group-cco-recognised-as-one-of-the-dataiq-100
draft: false
meta_title: "MyLife Digital Group CCO recognised as one of the DataIQ 100"
---

J Cromack amongst the most important and influential people in data-driven businesses and the innovators who support them. Last night, DataIQ announced the Data 100, at a celebration of the great and the good from across the Data industry at the OXO Tower in London. To reach this accolade, individuals need to show real leadership within their organisations, demonstrating the importance and value of data and analytics or demonstrate genuine impact on the way data and analytics are deployed by clients. They also need to be engaged with the broader data and analytics industry and support the DataIQ mission of advancing the profession of data and analytics. Whether this is by being a member of an industry council, speaking at industry conferences or taking part in meet-ups, this shows confidence, commitment, and influence to inspire a wider audience. In a year set to be dominated by the "game changing" General Data Protection Regulation, DataIQ has recognised the central role that will be played by the Information Commissioner, Elizabeth Denham, by placing her in the number one position of the DataIQ 100 Top 10 for 2018. Her role in guiding UK businesses towards compliance and ensuring they stick to it when enforcement begins on 25th May made her the obvious candidate. David Reed, knowledge and strategy director of DataIQ who led the selection process for the DataIQ 100, said: "The role of Information Commissioner is critical in ensuring GDPR has its intended impact - a balancing of individual and consumer rights around data processing. Elizabeth operates at the nexus of those interests and has shown herself to be adept at emphasising the 'carrot' of opportunity, while reminding the industry of the 'stick' of penalties. We are proud to put her at the head of our list of the most influential and important data-driven business professionals of 2018." So, MyLife Digital's Chief Commercial Officer J is in good company along with the remaining 98. Upon hearing about his inclusion, he said "What is arguable one of the most important years, not only the data industry but for data protection and all citizens of the EU, with the introduction of the GDPR in May, it is a great privilege to be selected to be part of the DataIQ 100 with fellow industry peers and professionals who hold such a wealth of knowledge and experience in the sector. I look forward to continuing the exciting work we are doing here at MyLife Digital, aiming to rebalance the trust in personal data between the organisation and the citizen. And continuing to spread the word about the importance of digital understanding, the value of data and data protection." J and the MyLife Digital team will be speaking at various events throughout 2018 - to find the event most suitable for you visit [events](https://consentric.io/events/) to keep up to date as new dates are added. [Click here to see J's DataIQ 100 profile](https://www.dataiq.co.uk/dataiq100/2018/j-cromack) [News Release on Response Wire](https://pressreleases.responsesource.com/news/95071/mylife-digital-group-cco-recognised-as-one-of-the-dataiq-100/)