---
layout: post
title: "Easy transfer of Data with European Union beyond Brexit relies on embracing GDPR"
author: Debs
date: 2018-01-19T08:49:42+00:00
categories: ["Brexit", "Data Transfers", "EU", "Europe", "European Union", "Europol", "GDPR", "Opinions", "Post Brexit", "UK"]
slug: easy-transfer-of-data-with-european-union-beyond-brexit-relies-on-embracing-gdpr
draft: false
meta_title: "Easy transfer of Data with European Union beyond Brexit relies on embracing GDPR"
---

While the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is being put forward by the three European regulatory bodies, it will still apply to the UK during the Brexit negotiations and implementation period. Therefore, it is an Organisation's responsibility to ensure they are “GDPR ready” even though the UK is leaving the European Union. However, many Organisations may worry about how freely data can be transferred post-Brexit. I believe there is a simple answer to this. The sharper an organisation integrates GDPR into the regulatory stature of the organisation, the easier they should find it to transfer data with the EU once the United Kingdom has relinquished its membership. It is vital that both Government and Organisations have a frictionless transfer of data back and forth with the EU member states and the framework of the EU itself. The numbers involved show evidently how important this is. Forty-three percent of EU technology companies are based in the UK, not only showing the importance of data transfer, but also the need of a free trade deal. Furthermore, seventy-five percent of the UK’s data transfers are with EU member states. These figures show, economically, how important it is that data transfers remain frictionless to avoid any sort of business communication breakdown. However, it is not just crucial economically, but also socially. The UK currently relies on European institutions such as Europol to provide Whitehall, particularly the Home Office, with relevant data on criminal activity related to a wide variety of crimes, from human trafficking to terrorism. Therefore, much of the United Kingdom’s security relies on close cooperation with institutions such as Europol, which in turn means the ability to easily share data between one and another. The Government has made it very clear that they are very aware of maintaining a strong and efficient data flow between the UK and EU post-Brexit. But, after a quick observation of the Governments “white paper”, it is clear there should be a more detailed approach when it comes to data transfer to avoid any sort of breakdown in business and security communications. I believe it should be our responsibility, within the technology and data industry, to pressurise the Government to ensure it has a competent and long term-strategy to frictionless trade and transfer of data. How will the United Kingdom ensure they can continue to transfer data post Brexit? Firstly, we will need to come to terms, that to the EU, the UK will be classed as a third country. Not in terms of socio-economic class, but in terms of trade relations. On the subject of transfers of data, the UK has to adopt the same regulatory framework and comply with EU data laws, to ensure we continue to have a free transfer of data between the UK and EU. Consequently, Organisations need to comply and continue to adopt GDPR regulations after Brexit. By doing this, corporations will be able to have the reinsurance that they will be able to transfer data post Brexit. MyLife Digital’s platform, Consentric, has been designed specifically for Organisations to understand their personal data processing activities and maintain a record of these activities, providing a platform that supports compliance with many aspects of the GDPR. This will not only ensure Organisations avoid potentially hefty fines, enforced by the regulatory body of the Member State, if they are not following the legislation, but also giving them a head start in terms of transfer of data post-Brexit. In terms of Government, it is vital they continue to embrace GDPR post-Brexit. As mentioned, the UK relies on data from the EU to ensure the nation’s security, ability to trade and cooperation within sectors such as Science and Innovation. The same rules apply to both Government and Organisations, Government organisations will have to apply the GDPR after Brexit, to ensure frictionless transfer of data across the channel and Irish Sea. Currently, we do not know what a final Brexit deal will look like, however, it is evidently in both sides interest to secure a deal where we continue to have close cooperation, both in the public and private sector. However, even if the UK does not secure a good deal, or what some in Westminster may call a “no deal”, the free flow of data between the UK and the remaining twenty-seven nation-states should not be impeded. Countries from outside the European Union are currently able to transfer data between themselves and the EU, as long as they comply the EU data protection laws. Therefore, as long as the UK continues to comply with EU data laws, which by the final Brexit data, will be under the umbrella of GDPR, UK Organisations will be able to freely transfer data with the European Union, without harsh regulatory barriers. This shows the importance of UK corporations, not only complying with GDPR after 25th May 2018, but in fact beyond Brexit to ensure they do not lose access the data from the European Union. Harry Cromack Analyst – MyLife Digital [For a downloadable version click here](https://consentric.io/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Easy-Transfer-of-Data-across-Europe-.pdf)