---
layout: post
title: "Our response to the ICO Consultation on GDPR consent guidance"
author: Debs
date: 2017-04-05T15:57:26+01:00
categories: ["Consent", "data", "DPA", "GDPR", "ICO", "Opinions", "Privacy"]
slug: our-response-to-the-ico-consultation-on-gdpr-consent-guidance
draft: false
meta_title: "Our response to the ICO Consultation on GDPR consent guidance"
---

<span style="s1">The ICO recently held a consultation for its draft of GDPR consent guidance. MyLife Digital wanted to understand better how consent under GDPR will impact our clients, other organisations and our own business practices. We submitted our response to the consultation with a hope that future guidance will provide more clarity on how to apply consent, and perhaps foremost, help organisations identify the best lawful reason for processing data. </span>

[You can view a PDF our response here](https://consentric.io/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/ICO-Consultation-Response-GDPR-Consent-Guidance-20170331-2.pdf) or continue reading for the plain txt version. We would also [welcome your feedback](mailto:kwatson@mylifedigital.co.uk) and additional thoughts on GDPR and its impact.

* * *

### ICO Consultation Response - GDPR CONSENT GUIDANCE

Company Overview MyLife Digital empowers organisations and individuals to realise the meaning, value and power of their data. We enable organisations to rethink their use of citizens’ personal data, and to help comply with the new General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), due to take effect in May 2018. MyLife Digital has developed the Consentric Platform to deliver innovative cloud-based services, including Permissions, Engage and Value Index. Founded in 2015, MyLife Digital Ltd acquired Wood for Trees Ltd, a data analysis company operating in the Charity Sector and PGIR Ltd, a data analysis company specialising in elite sport performance analysis. MyLife Digital holds ISO27001 and Cyber Essentials certifications, along with International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP) and Direct Marketing Association (DMA) membership. **Background Information** The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) recently held a consultation for feedback on its draft General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) consent guidance. MyLife Digital wanted to understand better how consent under GDPR will impact our clients, other organisations and our own business practices. We submitted our response to the consultation with a hope that future guidance will provide more clarity on how to apply consent and perhaps foremost, help organisations identify the best lawful reason for processing data. What follows is a copy of our response to the ICO. We welcome any constructive feedback and additional thoughts on the GDPR, its application to business processes and impact on the citizen. **The ICO’s Introduction** The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) will apply in the UK from May 2018 and replaces the Data Protection Act 1998 (DPA). The GDPR sets a high standard for consent. It builds on the DPA standard of consent in many areas and it contains significantly more detail that codifies existing European guidance and good practice. Our draft guidance on consent explains our recommended approach to compliance and what counts as valid consent. It also provides practical help to decide when to rely on consent, and when to look at alternatives. We are now running a short consultation on the draft guidance to gather the views of stakeholders and the public. These views will inform the published version of the guidance. We are provisionally aiming to publish this guidance in May 2017, although this timescale may be affected if we need to take account of developments at the European level. We intend to publish this guidance as a series of linked webpages that can be downloaded as a pdf. As the GDPR is a new regulation which applies consistently across the EU, our published guidance will need to continue to evolve to take account of any guidelines issued in future by relevant European authorities (including the Article 29 Working Party of European data protection authorities and the EDPB), as well as our developing experience of applying the law in practice. Following the end of the consultation \[31st March\] we shall publish a summary of responses received. Information people provide in response to our consultations, including personal information, may be disclosed in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and the Data Protection Act 1998. If you want the information that you provide to be treated as confidential please tell us, but be aware that we cannot guarantee confidentiality. **MyLife Digital Response** This is the response from MyLife Digital to the ICO consultation for GDPR consent guidance. 1. Is the draft guidance clear and easy to understand? No Whilst the language used is plain English, the structure of the document does not make for easy reading. For example, it is a guidance for consent, but repeatedly refers to the difficulty of using consent. Along with the numerous suggestions of Legitimate Interests as an alternative lawful reason for processing data, this could lead organisations down the wrong path - that will not ensure compliance with GDPR. Legitimate Interests of the organisation will need to be measured against the impact to the rights of the citizen and this is not made clear. The approach regarding the use of opt out boxes does not come across clearly. Whilst the GDPR does not ‘specifically’ ban them, it is believed that an opt out box behaves in the same manner as a pre-ticked box, which would be banned. The guidance should be absolutely clear and say that opt out boxes should not be used, if that is what is being suggested. Finally, where an organisation has an unknown state of consent, how are they expected to achieve clarity without an option to contact their consumers? More information is provided in section 5. 2. Does the guidance contain the right level of detail? No We feel that there are significant elements missing that make the guidance incomplete resulting in an unclear message to citizens and organisations alike. An example is the differentiation between explicit consent and consent. Further information is provided in section 5 below. 3. Do you have any examples of consent in practice, good or bad, that you think would be useful to include in the guidance? Yes Examples of layered privacy policies Examples of due diligence checklists to:

*   determine the lawful reason for processing data
*   to demonstrate in words how to clearly obtain explicit consent
*   determine the length of time a consent remains valid.

**4\. Does the guidance cover the right issues about consent under the GDPR?** No If not what do you believe is missing? There has been much commentary regarding the GDPR and its application, for example, that mail and phone communications would remain as “Opt-out”. Whilst this is based purely on speculation, there has been significant talk, across many industries, and it would be useful to address the areas where the guidance directly contradicts speculation. The guidance does not highlight how PECR & GDPR will work together and the implications of PECR to an organisation’s GDPR compliance activities. Whilst we recognise that it is a separate regulation in its own right and is liable to change, recent action against Honda and FlyBe bring this to the fore and highlights that organisations need further guidance. **DPA consent vs GDPR consent** Whilst the guidance states that an organisation does not have to refresh all DPA consents in preparation for GDPR, many organisations will not hold the detail required to be compliant. There is no guidance on how they can legally upgrade this data particularly where there would be a conflict with PECR. Is it in the best interests of the citizen to penalise the organisation for trying to upgrade their current data set around consent statuses? This would be an area where practical guidance would prove useful. **Digital Economy Bill interaction with GDPR** The DEB has its final reading on the 5th April, but does contain provision about protection of intellectual property in connection with electronic communications; provision about datasharing; provision about the regulation of direct marketing; provision about OFCOM and its functions; and for connected purposes. Any overlap or exclusions from GDPR need to be explored, explained and communicated in this guidance. **5\. Please provide any further comments or suggestions on our draft guidance.** **Consent is too difficult** With consent being a significant feature of GDPR, this guidance is an opportune example for the ICO to provide direction that is in keeping with the spirit of GDPR as well as it’s legal application. To focus on giving citizens’ back more control over the use of their personal data, whilst in parallel, helping organisations to rebuild or strengthen trust with their consumers. To suggest that consent could be too difficult to obtain undermines the opportunity for organisations to re-consider their processes - which should place the citizen in a position of control over their Personal Information Management. Rather than suggest that consent is too difficult, the guidance should ensure that organisations understand that they need to clearly identify the correct lawful reason for processing personal data first and foremost. Where consent has been deemed the correct reason, and the processing passes the appropriate checks, this can be officially declared as the lawful reason being used for a particular process. Lending the practice to a high level of transparency and increasing growth through trust. By identifying how they are using personal data, an organisation has the opportunity to transform their practices to provide citizens’ a real choice. Enabling consent to be the most appropriate lawful reason for processing data. **Legitimate interest vs consent** Legitimate interests as an alternative to consent is mentioned frequently, but there is no indication that organisations’ will need to clearly justify the use of legitimate interests, demonstrating that they have balanced this against the rights of the citizen. The selection of a lawful reason for processing data appears subjective and this document focuses significantly on legitimate interests. This could lead an organisation to select legitimate interests as an alternative to consent without giving full consideration to all the lawful reasons for processing personal data. **Citizen-centricity** By introducing consent as a difficult option, the document does not sit with the spirit of the GDPR as a citizen-centric regulation focussed on giving citizens genuine choice and readdressing trust with organisations. This is a big focus of the GDPR and in using consent as a lawful means of processing data, gives the citizen more control over how they want their personal data to be used. **Consent expiry and refresh** Consent expiry is a new feature under the GDPR and one that citizens and organisations will need to have clarity around. It is appreciated that there are many different reasons for processing data across the multitude of industries in the U.K. However, a citizen will need to see consistency around the treatment of their personal data to have clarity. It would be useful to provide best practice examples of some common types of processing and the length of time that consent could be deemed valid. Alternatively, some checkpoints to determine this; for example, type of data stored, risk of processing category, frequency of communication. **Changes to purposes** Over time, organisations will evolve, e.g. to provide new services, or in response to regulation or technological changes. This evolution will have a bearing on the purposes for processing of data. What guidance will be given to organisations to perform due diligence against new processes to assess whether consent is still valid? Where consent is unknown, but is the appropriate lawful reason to process data, how can an organisation communicate with their consumers to obtain this consent? Would the ICO create a set of due diligence checks for organisations to follow? **Public authorities** We feel that the ICO ruled out consent being a viable option across public authorities, and this may not be the case for all their activities. “Public authorities, employers and other organisations in a position of power over citizens should avoid relying on consent” Whilst we agree that there are situations that consent would not be the lawful basis for processing personal data, it could be reasonably expected that there are other acceptable reasons for processing data with consent; for example, a police force outreach programme as part of a new neighbourhood watch initiative. **Explicit consent vs consent** To differentiate between explicit consent and consent the ICO reference that explicit consent must be expressly confirmed in words. What guidance will be given by the ICO regarding this wording to ensure that where explicit consent is required, the organisation is using the correct terminology? **Consent as a preference?** There are mentions of using preference management tools to allow citizens to easily access and update their consents. Providing consent should not be confused with declaring a preference; for example, the type of communication you receive or the method by which you receive it. Does this then make the option of giving consent a preference? **Named third parties** There will regularly be situations where at the time of collecting data, the use of a specific third party will not be known. How is the organisation expected to treat the consents they have once the third party is known?